 In his Hall of Fame NBA career, Charles Barkley accumulated 12,546 rebounds. But he pulled the ultimate rebound when he finished playing. Equalling, maybe even eclipsing, his considerable skills on a basketball court with his singular talent in a TV studio. For the last 23 years, Barkley has been delivering witty blunt provocative opinions on every imaginable topic. Often imparted with a smile, always imparted with, I don't give a damn if you agree with me, Candor. Imagine Mark Twain with a low post game. As we first reported in March, despite his lack of a tongue editor, maybe because of it, Barkley now 60 seems cancel proof, granted license to go right up to that mid-court line of acceptability, even to stop over it sometimes. It's made him more relevant than ever. It's made him dare we say it an American treasure. The story will continue in a moment. Why do you suppose people want to listen to you? I think they know that I'm going to be honest, I'm going to be fair, I don't have a hidden agenda. Not many people on TV that you can set out about. What's up, everybody? You don't have a chance to win every year. That's one of the biggest lies ever told. Sixty nights a year, Charles Barkley is the go-to guy on TNT's inside the NBA. I like it. The people like, you think our team sucks. I'm like, yeah, I only think they call it a suck. A path-breaking, Emmy-dominating show that makes for riveting unscripted TV. You're big dummy. You're fun up there. It's just basketball. We're not solid inflation. We didn't just kid back from Afghanistan. But you're not going to use car salesmen either. I mean, if the game's no good, you'll admit it. Oh, yeah. Because the fans ain't stoop it. They just saw it. If I tell them that was a good game, they're going to be like, what the hell is Charles talking about? You said sometimes you even fall asleep on the set. Oh, I fall asleep, man. You're like, just sitting there watching like, oh man, this is just bad basketball. You know, I'm going to raise some hell around here. This is what America has come to expect from Charles Barkley. We have to talk about the lake. The lake is awful. For Chuck, it's just, I'm going to let it fly. And if you don't like it, tough. Five, four. Ernie Johnson is the longtime host of Inside the NBA. Charles is down there. Well, we have to say, where is this going? We'll start a show and Charles will look at me and say, I got to get something off my chest. It could be something that involves a world peace or the Brooklyn nets, or it could be something. He could be upset that his plumber showed up late and he just has to get it off his chest. We got to be serious on this show sometime. But if Barkley brings levity, he also brings gravity. Memphis Groosley star, John Morant, was suspended in March after this Instagram live video showed him flashing a gun at a strip club. Barkley used it to make a broader point. Guns, especially in the black community, the way we kill each other, it's just really unfortunate and sad. And we got to, it's always been a problem, but it seemed like it's gotten worse in the last few years. Black on black crime and the way we've been killing each other. Barkley may be at his most visible in the studio in Atlanta. But for a fuller sense of the man, he had two hours west to his hometown of Leeds, Alabama. I'm telling y'all, I did not name the street after myself. You didn't love him for Carl Barkley Avenue. I did not love him for Charles Barkley Avenue. We interviewed Barkley in the home, he still keeps in town. It's a few hundred yards from where he grew up. You were angry that your dad left the family when you were one years old. I was very angry and I was even angry because he kept saying he was going to send us money and he didn't do it. Because like, you know, my mom and grandma were working never hens off. And the thing that was really bad about it, I was stunned by the mailbox like once every three or four months. Waiting for the checks. Yes, but he never came. His indomitable grandma, Johnny May, who helped raise him, still inspires stories when Charles and his buddies get together in Leeds. She was granted what the real deal. It was the grandi really. Yeah, they got them out. And she had one, two. So we were really poor. We didn't know it at the time. So to make ends meet, she's so alcohol. Where? In the house. In the shot house. In your house. Yeah. But people would come up friday and Saturday and play cards. Everybody starts drinking once somebody loses their money. That's going to be a fight. So my grandmother's little old lady, she's walking around with a sick shooter. And she's keeping the peace. I didn't even know any better, John. I thought this was normal stuff. Well, yeah. I think it's time for a new floor. Barkley also took us to his old junior high gym. It stands barely as a symbol of how far he's come. 14, 15 year old Charles Barkley walking in here. Who's that kid? He's a 5, 9, 5, 10 big bone, not fat, big bone, that chubby, whatever words you want to use. I'm a 5, 10 back up point guard. You remember specific plays and shots from playing here? High game. We got you on the wing. Well, first of all, this is a tie game. I'm not going to be in the game. Let's get that out to where you. A six inch growth spurt helped turn Barkley into a high school basketball star. But his formative teenage experience came at the school football stadium. Wow. This is where he stood alone at a distance watching his classmates graduate. I flunk Spanish, so I didn't graduate. I was at home all by myself, devastated. And I drove around the backside here, and I stood here for two hours and watched the graduation. And I cried the whole time. Even now, it's kind of hit me in the heart a little bit. Man, what a traumatic night that was. You remember the name of the teacher? I miss Gomez. I'll never forget that. And miss Gomez, when I go back and think was one of the sweetest, kindest people, I never met in my life. But in that moment, I was so mad. Because, you know, I was holding my head in the air too. He graduated thanks to summer school. At all burn, he was a star, yes, for his skills, but also for his heroic appetite. He embraced his nickname, the round mound of rebound. After he was drafted in 1984, he became a charismatic NBA star for the Philadelphia 76ers. He's the shortest man ever to lead the NBA in rebounding. Proof that, for all Barclays Yox, he played with Fury. I was playing to stick it to my dad, miss Gomez, and some of the kids who had made fun of me. Instead of just wanting to be great at basketball. What's firing up this furnace is the anger you have for your Spanish teacher that flunked you? Yes. And your dad? Yes, 100%. What caused you to flush out this anger and get motivated for different reasons? The spin incident in New Jersey. In 1991, he spat at a Heckler and inadvertently hit a young girl. He calls it the low point of his career. I got to spend it rightfully so. I was sitting in my hotel room and I was like, you are the biggest loser in the world. I remember saying, this is it tonight. Meaning what? I am only going to play basketball because I'm great at it and I love to play. I'm getting all the dirt off my shoulders. And miss Gomez, bye. Dad, bye. That was really the turning point for me. I should tell you. Barkley was the NBA's MVP in 1993 for the Phoenix Sons. And then, months after retiring in 2000, he embarked on a broadcasting career. Number one, there's no dominant team. Full disclosure, you may have seen him on this network working March Madness. When are you making the college game today? It's a travesty on the disgrace. I'm so mad now how we can mess up something that's so beautiful. How do we mess it up? We can't pay all these players. Translation, Barkley hates the new Wild West of college sports, where players go to the schools that can bid the highest. In the next three to five years, we're going to have 25 schools that's going to dominate the sports because they can afford players. And these schools who can't afford or won't pay players are going to be irrelevant. Almost a quarter century since Barkley last played. And now for my paying, his opinions free of varnish still matter. It's Kevin Durantich, great player. If you ain't driving a bus, don't walk around talking about you at the champion. His takes don't always go over well. Kevin Durant, a perennial All-Star, once set of Barkley, I don't know why they still ask for this idiot's opinion. Kevin Durant. He's very sensitive, great player. He's part of that generation who think he can't be criticized. He's never looked in the mirror and says, man, was that a fair criticism? We're in agreement today's players are a little more sensitive to criticism than your generation. That will be an understatement. Today's players take offense, but so have players from your generation. Been a while since you and Michael Jordan spoke. Michael disagreed with something I said and he broke off the friendship. Born three days apart, Barkley and Jordan were once the best of friends. But as Jordan struggled as owner of the Charlotte Hornets, Barkley meant no words. And what I said, I think that he don't have enough people around him going to tell him no. And he got really offended and we haven't spoken. But, John, I really, I'm going to do my job. Because I have zero credibility. If I criticize other people in the same boat and not criticize my best friend. Even if you have nothing to apologize for, you're thinking of just picking up the phone and trying to repair this thing with Michael. I got to ego too, John. You can't be great at something like that don't get you right to be a jerk. You think you'll resolve this eventually? He got my number. If you really want to get Barkley going on disappointment, ask him about his daughter, Chris John, who's basketball skills. Your daughter's not a basketball player. That was brutal. She was six feet tall from birth. I'm going to have the best female basketball player in the world. I can't wait until she's old enough. I'm going to teach her everything. And then we start playing. And I'm sitting in the stands and I'm sitting myself. Oh, man, she is not aggressive at all. So I asked her one day, I said, you don't like basketball, dude, she's old dad. I hate basketball. And I said, oh, okay. And it took me a little while to get over that. But you're being serious now. But she's a great person and a straight A student. So I had to brag about that. I guarantee that makes you feel every bit as good as her hitting a game-winning jumper. Not quite, but it is close enough. Cristiana, now 34, recently had a son, Henry. The new grandpa says he's never felt joy like this. When we arrived, he broke out this video. It is by far and away the greatest thing that's ever happened to me in my life. Lives up to the hype. It lives up to the hype. I want to spend time with him because I'm not morbid. I'm not upset. I'm on the back nine. I hope I'm on hold 10 or 11. But you never know. I could be on 17 and 18. So I want to spend as much time with him as possible. And then when he gets older, I want him to Google me. Google me, kid. Yeah, yeah. Do you know who I am? I hope he does some research on me. I'll be long gone. But I would like him to know that I accomplished some things in my life. I got to live my dream. Charles Barkley, Ungratitude. If you think I'm better or I work harder, you just stoop it. At 60 minutes over time.com.