Yannick Nezze Saga is a conductor operating at Triple Tempo at once the director of three
major orchestras in Philadelphia in his hometown of Montreal and in the Metropolitan Opera
New York, which is pinned on him the hopes for rebounding from financial crisis and the
bold revamping of its artistic mission.
Not that you'll catch Nezze Saga sweating it.
At 48 he's obliterating the stereotype of the strict, unapproachable maestro.
Joyfully keeping his musicians in time, his hair bleached platinum blonde and a smile
all but welded to his face.
Known as much for his versatility as his virtuosity, Nezze Saga, as we first told you
in May, is reimagining the role of the modern orchestra and its place in the soundtrack
of the modern city.
The story will continue in a moment.
You'd be forgiven for double checking your ticket to make sure you weren't at Madison Square
Garden.
This is New York's Metropolitan Opera.
And in this corner, the maestro, Yannick Nezze Saga, only the third music director in the
Met's 140-year history.
He's conducting a jazz-infused opera about a real-life boxing champion of the 1960s and
70s.
All this is a radical key change from the standard Met lineup of Puccini and Verdi and Vogue
Girl.
Nezze Saga's eyes reach musicians in the pit and vocalists on stage, seemingly
all at once.
The bounce in his baton concentrates every note.
It's the cathartic moment where, oh my god, this is so amazing, this is so impressive,
this is so intense, this is so emotional.
And this cathartic experience we feel transformed as a different person before and after listening
to these pieces.
There seems to be something sacred about you're making music, my overstating that.
No, no, you're not.
I try never to take myself too seriously, but music has to be taken seriously.
A pianist by training, who's conducted the great Philharmonics of Europe, Nezze Saga brings
his sensibility to bear up and down the Eastern Seaboard.
In Philadelphia, he is the current custodian of what's been a world-renowned orchestra
for more than a century.
We visited in February, as the city celebrated the contract extension through 2030 of a
maestro known to all by his first name.
That morning, Yanik and his musicians made the pilgrimage up the famed rocky steps, clad
in Eagles gear.
He sees the orchestra, not unlike a sports team, as an instrument of cohesion in the community.
In the afternoon, Nezze Saga stopped by Philharmonics' premiere performing our
high school to guest conduct the students.
I think if we were to agree to bite even more in every note, like, ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta ta.
That's it.
That's what I'm talking about.
450 miles do north, back home in Montreal.
They speak his language in more ways than one.
He has a lifetime contract with the orchestra's metropolitane.
Nezze Saga has led these musicians for more than 20 years.
That's his husband, Pierre Tourville, on Viola.
The depth of his connection here produces hypnotic sound.
Listen to this, a rehearsal of Sabelius' fifth symphony.
Some weeks, Janique leads performances in all three cities.
Just last Saturday, he conducted a matinee in New York and the evening program in Philly.
Then again, what is a conductor if not someone able to synchronize?
I can't deny that it's a very demanding schedule and even the word schedule, if should I ever
retire, I want to ban that word from my life.
Do you have a favorite child among the three orchestras you conduct?
You cannot ask me this.
Yet one child in particular, and isn't this always the case, demands extra attention and
TLC.
Can we have more importance in the third party?
Pum, pum, pum, pum.
At the Met, the country's largest performing arts institution, we watched him wrangle 250
musicians and singers for a production of Wagner's Lowengrin, a stalwart opera that gave
us the bridal chorus.
In Nezze Saga's interpretations do right by the masters.
What I want is to respect what Wagner wrote in the score.
It was very poetic and magical.
What's really individual is me being completely at the service of the composer.
Yannick took over the podium here in 2018 after his predecessor was fired for allegations
of sexual misconduct.
Facing weak ticket sales and perpetually strapped for cash, the Met has had a hard time rebounding
from COVID and is dipped into its endowment to cover around 10% of its $300 million operating
budget.
They've tried courting a younger, more diverse crowd here before, but Nezze Saga is doing
it prestissimo, speeding up the tempo of change.
He's betting that new composers and contemporary operas, some adapted from bestselling books
in Hollywood hits, will bring in a wider audience and shore up the bottom line.
And early results suggest he's right.
A recent premiere of the opera Fire Shut Up in My Bones, based on a memoir by journalist
Charles Blow, in composed by jazz legend Terrence Blanchard, sold out and outsold Verde's
classic regaletto here that season.
What's more, half the seats were filled by first time Met Goers.
It's great, such a success, and yet I'm thinking that means that all of these people never
felt compelled or there I say welcome to come here.
And that is my mission.
First timers were 50%.
You saw that as both a triumph, but also sounds like an indictment.
Mostly it's a tremendous encouragement to continue in that vein.
The Met will put on 17 new and recent works over the next five seasons, this at a place
that once went near decades without staging a new opera.
This spring brought champion, another Terrence Blanchard composition based on the complicated
life of Emil Griffin, a bisexual prize fighter.
What can't you write an opera about?
Nothing.
How do you thread that needle between experimenting and bringing in new audiences, but also not
upsetting the traditionalists?
The truth is, I'm not necessarily concerned about not upsetting traditionalists.
I think people who love our art form are still going to love it because we're still
going to play some Puccini and Verde.
To me it's never about not upsetting and if some people are upset, well, too bad they
just don't have to come to everything we do.
And that's about as prickly as you'll hear him get.
Beyond Janik's musician ship, his real hallmark might be his light touch.
Okay, let's do it one more time.
Take this rehearsal for champion.
The first time the orchestra rhythm section and singers played the piece together, but also
that rare collaboration between a conductor and a living composer.
He gets it.
Terence Blanchard, a seven time Grammy winner, is the first black composer in the Met's
history.
He gets the story, he gets the whole notion of bringing these different styles of music
together.
One of the rehearsals with the orchestra, he said, listen, don't follow me, listen to
the drums.
Most conductors don't do that.
I'm there for you.
Okay, cool.
We saw first-hand Janik's responsiveness when soprano Latanya Moore asked him to slow
things down.
We go in here slower.
I just want to really get everything out.
Yeah, so right from the bass.
Is there a worry though that your authority might be undercut by all these good vibes?
I think it's the old concept of authority, which is because I say so and because I can
fire you, I'm going to tell you what to do.
It's not working anymore and I will go even further, even the masters of the past.
Toscanini, for example.
Fantastic musician, of course, I respect a lot of this, but you can hear with some recordings
with Toscanini, especially with singers.
You could hear the fear in their voice.
And to me, that's not expressive.
You can discern.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, I'm sure you could.
Like, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh.
Like they're trembling because they fear, because already to open your mouth on the
stage is already nerve-wracking.
If you have a conductor who's waiting for you to fail, it's going to be even more nerve-wracking.
The music doesn't win.
The music wins when everybody feels free to express who they are.
Janik found that freedom for himself his earliest grade school.
Here he is leading an imaginary orchestra in front of classmates.
He studied at the conservatory in Montreal, a music town with a church on every corner.
He led the church choir in his teens and trained his ear in less formal ways, too.
I would go to a record store and buy CDs and discover repertoire after repertoire.
Every symphony by Brahms, every symphony by Beethoven, by Brookner, by Mahler.
I wanted them to hear every version and by every version of every symphony.
And I'm not sure I'd say that it's shaped a lot of who I am as a musician,
because eventually I became a collection of like 12,000 CDs.
Last winter, we visited his parents at Yaniks childhood home, the kind of folks who keep
every clipping.
Yaniks told us when he was a boy, he collected thousands and thousands, maybe 10,000 CDs.
Oh, more than that.
He wasn't exaggerating.
No, no, no, no, no, no.
That's all.
Where did you put that?
He made the shelves.
And it was his mom who managed Yaniks' schedule throughout his thirties, as he worked
the international circuit, London, Vienna, Rotterdam, guest-conducting 100 orchestras.
He made his Met début in 2009, persistence paying off.
And if today he's living the dream, he's also conscious to live his life.
He and Pierre go on the road together.
We met them at a spot in Old Montreal where they had celebrated their wedding.
They make a point of going out after every performance.
Friends, family, members of the orchestra, colleagues, some people together to eat well and drink
a little.
Of all the musical moments in the couple's history, we were surprised when Yaniks highlighted
this one.
And time Pierre and Celine Dion serenaded him on a popular Quebec talk show, a kind of musical
this is your life.
Of course, it's one of the most moving moments of my life.
Not everybody can say that they've sung a duet with Celine Dion.
You were Celine Dion, but shelly and Barbara Streisand, and then...
And Pierre.
And Pierre.
Wow.
Maybe it's a hard turn from Celine to the Met for most conductors, not so for Yaniks'
say, Saga.
Yes, he takes music seriously, but resists being too precious about it.
You have to trust your acoustics.
He's too busy smudging boundaries that have long kept some audiences away from classical
music and opera.
I would love that when I finish my time on Earth that no one ever says again, oh classical
music is not for me, it's for the educated, it's for the rich, it's for the white, whatever
it is.
You know, I want everyone to feel, oh yeah, I could like it, some of it.
I don't like Mozart, but I like Blanchard.
Fine, but at least you feel that you could go there because there would be something for
you.
What would Puccini and Verdean Wagner make of all this?
On suspects, they would join in the applause.
They, after all, were once musical boundary pushers too.
For a look at how 60 minutes reports its stories, go to 60minutesovertime.com.
