You'd expect a 600-year-old sport to have played through its identity crisis, not the case
for pool. The sport's very name comes from pooling money to determine odds, and wadring
lens pool mystique. Hustling and pool go together like acoustic and chalk, but that's as much
a curse as a blessing. How can a sport thrive at the highest level when so much of it exists
in the shadows? Well, here comes Shane Van Boning from Rapid City. As we first told you in
December, at age 39 with no interest in gambling, Van Boning is arguably the best American player
ever to break a rack, and was ranked number one in the world for 2022. He also happens to be
deaf. Can the South Dakota kid help turn pool, popular in bars and basements, but not on TV,
into a proper pro sport? We hit the circuit with him to find out. The story will continue in a moment.
Another day, another casino hotel, Shane Van Boning spends 300 days a year on the road playing
professional pool. Today he's clocking in early at the jamboree of American pool tournaments,
the Derby City Classic. Held every January outside Louisville, Derby City is a colorful
expression of pool split personality. Downstairs a felt ocean drawing dozens of the world's best
practitioners. They compete 12 hours a day for nine days in multiple events. This winner is
smiling ear to ear and his check tops out at $16,000. But upstairs it's a different economy.
Behold pools zestier side. Pop up action rooms standing room only where pros,
amateurs and wannabes alike come to the table for unofficial competition. The signs say no smoking
and no gambling, and we short-in see any smoking. Ten sometimes hundreds of thousands of dollars,
big timber they call it, change hands until the sun comes up. One player we didn't see gambling
upstairs, Shane Van Boning. A generational talent known for his killer break. Van Boning has won
the US Open five times and been named player of the decade. Depth since birth he wears hearing aids
and shuts down any question this makes it harder for him to play pool.
It's actually a big advantage for me. How's that? You know when I play full tournament I can just
set it off. Do you set your hearing aids off on your play? When I won my first US Open,
I had everything off, I would focus total sales. Yes, I'm totally like 100% zoning.
Never more zoned in than in 2018 when he led the United States to victory over Europe at the
Moscone Cup. Pools answered to golf's rider cup. And he is going for it. He closed it out with
an off-angle long distance 1-9 combo. This high risk high reward pressure packed shot.
What a shot! Shane Van Boning in Team USA! Unbelievable finish!
Think you could have made that shot? We went to Rapid City, South Dakota, a side pocket of America
to Van Boning's pool hall where he explained that making balls disappear into pockets is only half
of pool excellence. It's also about setting up your next shots. The cue ball control they call it.
And I'm going to make the cue ball stop right here so I can shoot the two inside.
Van, I'm going to...
Alright, so you did that how? How did you do that?
Just hit it right below center. So now it lines up that next ball perfectly.
Yeah. I'm so struck by the geometry of all this.
Yeah, I love geometry. He's all about the angles.
Van Boning says he can see every angle on the table. A sixth sense that comes from
practicing as much as 10 hours a day, shooting half a million balls a year.
I want to make the shot perfect. You know, if you're on a way to hit it perfect,
you got to do it over and over and over. Can you be perfect in the sport?
No. I try to show how it's done all these years.
Van Boning comes by it honestly. His grandfather Gary Bloomberg, a known
trick shot artist, opened pool halls off by 90. Easy access for hustlers passing across
the great plains. But these rooms were family friendly places.
So much so Shane got his first pool cue when he was two and went to the pool room every day
after school. Not just to play but to escape kids who picked on him for being deaf.
How bad did it get? The kid was starting going to us at me.
They would put gum in my hair. And then I would go home to my mom and
I'd be going home crying. And then she made me feel better by asking me
you want to go to the pool. Why did coming to the pool room make you feel better?
You know when you're walking to the pool and what do you see?
You know, you see people having a good time.
But it was more than that. He had prodigious ability for thinking multiple strokes ahead.
When Van Boning was 18, he hit the road. He and his uncle loaded into an RV looking for money games.
Came to play pools, bats.
Of course they did. The hustler, that stealth road man,
armed only with a wooden stick and confidence,
divorcing the locals from their cash,
had been romanticized for decades, not least by Paul Newman.
This reporter was so taken by pool hustling he once wrote a book about it.
For Van Boning, the romance hit the rocks abruptly.
Yeah, I actually was playing the pool in Tennessee.
And I was playing this guy for money.
And we were playing for a whole lot and he was losing.
And he picked up the keyboard and threw it at me.
Where'd he hit you?
Hit me right on the chest.
It's the kind of thing you do to start a fight.
Yeah.
How'd you react?
I told my uncle I said,
I don't want to do this anymore.
I don't want to live on a road anymore.
It's just too dangerous.
Here we go for the title.
He chose to go legit and began playing in winning proper tournaments.
Though less lucrative than the rambling gambling life,
Van Boning enjoyed being a professional.
Did you worry that coming in off the road was going to impact your finances?
I know some of the pool players like the top pool players were making money,
so if they can do it, I can do it.
But pool is a deceptively tricky sport.
Next up to Superpowers Collide.
Just as Shane's Scottish counterpart Jason Shaw, another top player.
Earlier this year, Shaw holed up in a Virginia pool room for five days and broke the
straight pool record making 714 shots in a row.
The stuff that happens in pool will completely screw your brain up.
What do you mean?
You'll see shots that you'll be like, how did that happen?
You'll hear that all day.
How did that land over there?
Did you see that?
How did that went in?
In pool, you see every game something weird will happen.
Does that make it more exhilarating or more frustrating?
Both mentally you want to like flip the table at some point.
You ever flip the table?
No, I've fought about it a few times.
People come in and say, how hard could it be?
It's just a rectangle with six packs.
Yeah, and then 20 minutes later, there's still 15 balls on the table.
They're not supposed to ball on the guys like stretching his head.
I thought this was easy.
It's not.
We watched you at Derby City play Jason Shaw.
Jason Hoop?
Yeah.
The arrival?
Yeah, it's been going on for several years now.
He's a great player.
Well, you're going to have a battle.
You okay with that?
Yeah.
You have to step losing.
If you don't have to step losing, you're going to go crazy.
I'll stick his aside right here.
If having a rival is central to being an elite athlete, so is this.
Leaving time to clear your head.
So it was, we found ourselves following Shane Van Boning out on to pack Tola Lake in the Black Hills.
Van Boning goes fishing.
Season B damned.
Every morning when he's back home.
We didn't catch any fish.
We did catch Van Boning's drift, though.
His take on the virtues of complete silence.
Vanity plate now with standing.
View extravagances come with being number one in pool.
The rag-tag pro tour barely televised in the US struggles to draw much interest,
or investment outside of pool diehards.
How many sponsors do you have?
I have shish sponsors.
Cues and tables and pool products.
Yes.
Any sponsors outside of pool?
No.
What can a top player make?
Top player and pool can make only shish figures.
After a spanishes, maybe five things.
No one's making a million bucks.
No.
As a pool player.
Never happened.
Van Boning says cleaning up the sport, doing away with backroom money games,
with lure big corporate sponsors, big media deals, and grow professional pool.
We saw first hand his discomfort with gambling,
and all that comes with it.
When we interviewed you in Derby City, I don't know if you remember the interview was interrupted.
Do you recall what happened?
Oh, in the gambling?
Was that what happened?
Yeah.
It was morning at Derby City, and the action upstairs from the night before was still simmering.
I think I was going.
Over the course of a few minutes, two players who'd bet on a game nearly came to blow.
Van Boning could only shake his head.
It got to be a clean sport.
Ender pro pools, unlikely new guardian, Emily Fraser of the British sports promoter, Matry.
The company recently revamped pro darts and snooker in the UK,
streamlining their circuits and turning top players into celebrities who make millions.
Fraser is tasked with doing the same for pool, and she says gambling is the least of her worries.
What's the state of professional pool today?
Oh, an absolute mess.
Why do you say that?
The first ever US Open that I did in 2019.
Oh my gosh, the players turned up.
They were in jeans.
When I'm going, hang on a second, like, what's happening here?
Why is this guy turning up in jeans?
Fraser has asked pro players to dress the part, but she won't ask them to give up their side hustles.
Now, all of the basement tables and the money matches, I think that's brilliant.
And that comes still.
Yeah, I think that it's fantastic because it's got the history behind it.
You're okay if people are still there, gambling and playing money games.
As far as I'm concerned, in a couple years time, they won't need to have any money.
It'll be absolute. The market will do its thing.
Exactly, but right now, it's not viewed as this professional sport.
And it has all the ingredients to be one.
She standardized the format.
This is commercialized sponsor-friendly nine ball,
not the solids and stripes eight ball you've likely played.
In October at the US Open, held in Atlantic City,
Fraser brought in bigger live audiences and ramped up TV production.
She's kept one pool hallmark, the Smokefield Room.
Close, but no cigar.
There's a machine puffing away in the corner.
When the Smoke cleared, there was Shane Van Boney.
He was fresh off winning his first world championship,
sealing his status atop the sport.
He confided to us that he'd slept with the trophy for a month.
Van Boney is mobbed at pool tournaments, but can still walk through an airport unbothered.
Well, he's no LeBron James and I totally understand that and I recognize that.
And it's our job to turn that around.
It is our responsibility to turn that world number one prize money
from $80,000 to a million.
So it's prize money.
It's more events and let's get these players known.
You've got to fall in love with them.
Are they loveable?
Yes, some of them.
The health of the sport also depends on minting a new generation of elite players.
So this tournament had a junior division held alongside the pros
and named what else the Shane Van Boney junior opened.
These are future pros?
Oh, yeah, definitely.
Definitely.
They have so much passion for the game.
And then I'm going to shoot the fish.
Back at the pool hall in Rapid City,
we experience pools, highs and lows in the same hour.
You didn't even let me hit a ball.
Ever the sports gentleman, Shane Van Boney wouldn't let us leave without setting us
up to sink a trick shot.
Pool, May or May not clean up its act.
But any sport that can provide this kind of pure simple thrill.
Let's go right down the middle.
Yep, right down the middle.
You reckon it'll survive just fine.
You got that.
